# Elimination (Knockout)

This chapter covers the complex algorithms of elimination (or knockout) tournament generation.

Elimination tournaments have each competitor go up against another, with the winner going on the next round, and the loser being either eliminated, or sent to a lower bracket. A single elimination tournament, also known as a sudden death tournament, is the most common variation, where each competitor is simply eliminated after a single loss, hence the name. Fittingly, a double elimination tournament allows each competitor to stay in the tournament after a loss, but are eliminated after their second loss.

One major rule of an elimination tournament is that only competitors of equal losses may match-up with each other. Undefeated competitors go against undefeated competitors, those with 1 loss go against those with 1 loss, etc. Because of this, the tournament is divided into brackets, listed vertically on the tournament diagram. The first and topmost bracket is called the Winners' Bracket, named so because only those who have no losses, and only wins, remain there. The second bracket, directly under the first, is called the First Losers' Bracket (or simply Losers' Bracket in the case of a double elimination tournament). It holds all the competitors which currently have 1 loss. Going down the bracket list, are the Second Losers' Bracket, and so on.

As competitors are eliminated, the end of certain brackets are reached. With only the single winner of a bracket remaining, they must go against the winner of the final match of the bracket directly above. The winner of this match might need to win multiple games, until one competitor has the required amount of losses to go down a bracket. This process is repeated, further and further down the brackets, until the final bracket winner goes against the remaining other winner from the bracket above, and the winner of this match, which might take multiple games, is crowned victor of the tournament.
